# Carrying Debt

Carrying debt on a credit card refers to the situation where you have an outstanding negative balance on the card and do not have the money set aside for paying it off in full when the next bill arrives. We highly recommend that you do _not_ do this for any new spending as it becomes super easy to accidentally fall into deeper debt. Instead, we recommend that you follow the [Within the Budget](./index.md) strategy for any new credit card purchases. But in case you're already carrying a negative balance on a credit card, this page will outline how to safely manage the debt without having to worry about going into more debt.

If you have an existing credit card debt that you need to track and gradually pay off then it's very important that any new purchases you make with the credit card are pre-funded following the [Within the Budget](./index.md) strategy as there is no point in paying off 100 extra on the credit card if you will then have to put another -100 on the card to pay for groceries the week after. Instead you should prioritize making sure that your actual expense categories are funded before allocating money to paying down the debt, which will allow you to ensure that you're paying it off in a sustainable manner without accidentally incurring more of it over time.

The simplest way to track preexisting credit card debt in Actual is to create a **Credit Card** category and set it to **Rollover overspending**. When you add your existing starting balance and any preexisting transactions to your credit card account you need to ensure that the category of those transactions is set to **Credit Card**. That way you can at any time look at the **Credit Card** category balance to see the status of your preexisting debt, and you can ensure that it's getting smaller over time.

- Create a **Credit Card XXXX** category for each card you have that you are carrying debt. Set them to _Rollover Overspending_.
- For each credit card account, input a starting balance equal to the **total** amount owed. Include all transactions to date, as if you were going to close the account, not just the statement balance. This starting balance goes in the "Payment" column. Categorize this starting balance to **Credit Card XXXX**.
- If you have a card with no debt, use it to make new purchases so you can pay ot off every month and pay down any others. If you don't, use a debit card, cash or **only one credit card** for new purchases and pay off the one with the highest interest first.
- You must budget each card for the minimum payment before you assign extra to pay down the debt. Remember to add the monthly interest as a new transaction in every credit card account.
 

Each month when you do your budgeting, _after_ you've accounted for all other necessary expense categories, including the minimum payments on each credit card, you can add extra to the credit card debt you are paying off by adding to it's **Budgeted** column. Examples: 
- if the minimum payment is $150, you have made $0 new purchases on the card and you added $50 extra to use to pay it down, the **Budgeted** column is $150 + $50 = $200. Make a $200 transfer to the credit card. 
- if you are using the card and carrying debt and **all** transactions have been categorized "Within the Budget", including the monthly interest transaction, you can calculate your monthly payment like this: If your credit card account balance is -5000 and your **Credit card XXXX** category balance is -4000, then the amount you spent and categorized _Within the Budget_ is 5000 - 4000 = 1000. Your payment is $1000 + the amount in the **Budgeted** column. Pay and transfer this amount to the credit card account.
- 

you allocate however much you want to pay down on that debt into the **Budgeted** column of the **Credit Card** category. Then when you go to pay your credit card bill you can easily find out how much you should actually pay by taking the **Credit Card** account balance and turning it positive and then adding the current **Credit Card** category balance to it. If your account balance is $ -5,500 and your category balance is $ -4,500 then you know that you need to pay off 5500 - 4500 = 1000. This amount will be greater than what you had put into the **Budgeted** column in case you're simultaneously following the [Within the Budget](./index.md) strategy of pre-funding new credit card purchases, and you can without worries pay off the calculated amount knowing that the money has already been explicitly set aside for this specific bill.
